README.rst, before:

.. License badge
.. |license| image:: https://img.shields.io/:license-Apache%202-blue.svg
    :target: https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.txt
    :alt: License

.. PyPI badges
.. |fury| image:: https://badge.fury.io/py/astronomer-cosmos.svg
    :target: https://badge.fury.io/py/astronomer-cosmos
    :alt: PyPI version

.. |python| image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/astronomer-cosmos.svg
    :target: https://pypi.org/project/astronomer-cosmos/
    :alt: Python versions

.. |downloads| image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/dm/astronomer-cosmos
    :target: https://pypi.org/project/astronomer-cosmos/
    :alt: PyPI downloads

.. Community badges
.. |contributors| image:: https://img.shields.io/github/contributors/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos
    :target: https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/graphs/contributors
    :alt: Contributors

.. |commits| image:: https://img.shields.io/github/commit-activity/m/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos
    :target: https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/commits/main
    :alt: Commit activity

.. |slack| image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/slack-%23airflow--dbt-white.svg?logo=slack&style=social
    :target: https://join.slack.com/t/apache-airflow/shared_invite/zt-1zy8e8h85-es~fn19iMzUmkhPwnyRT6Q
    :alt: Slack #airflow-dbt

.. |health| image:: https://insights.linuxfoundation.org/api/badge/health-score?project=astronomer-astronomer-cosmos
    :target: https://insights.linuxfoundation.org/project/astronomer-astronomer-cosmos
    :alt: LFX Health Score

.. Dev tools badges
.. |pre-commit| image:: https://results.pre-commit.ci/badge/github/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/main.svg
    :target: https://results.pre-commit.ci/latest/github/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/main
    :alt: pre-commit.ci status

.. Build status badges
.. |build-main| image:: https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/actions
    :alt: Build main

.. image:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/main/docs/_static/cosmos-logo.svg


===========================================================

|license| |fury| |python| |downloads|

|contributors| |commits| |slack| |health|

|pre-commit| |build-main|

Run your dbt Core projects as `Apache Airflow® <https://airflow.apache.org/>`_ DAGs and Task Groups with a few lines of code. Benefits include:

- Run dbt projects against Airflow connections instead of dbt profiles
- Native support for installing and running dbt in a virtual environment to avoid dependency conflicts with Airflow
- Run tests immediately after a model is done to catch issues early
- Utilize Airflow's data-aware scheduling to run models immediately after upstream ingestion
- Turn each dbt model into a task/task group complete with retries, alerting, etc.

Quickstart
__________

Check out the Getting Started guide on our `docs <https://astronomer.github.io/astronomer-cosmos/getting_started/index.html>`_. See more examples at `/dev/dags <https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/tree/main/dev/dags>`_ and at the `cosmos-demo repo <https://github.com/astronomer/cosmos-demo>`_.


Example Usage
___________________

You can render a Cosmos Airflow DAG using the ``DbtDag`` class. Here's an example with the `jaffle_shop project <https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle_shop>`_:

..
   This renders on Github but not Sphinx:

https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/blob/24aa38e528e299ef51ca6baf32f5a6185887d432/dev/dags/basic_cosmos_dag.py#L1-L42

This will generate an Airflow DAG that looks like this:

.. figure:: https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/blob/main/docs/_static/jaffle_shop_dag.png


Community
_________
- Join us on the Airflow `Slack <https://join.slack.com/t/apache-airflow/shared_invite/zt-1zy8e8h85-es~fn19iMzUmkhPwnyRT6Q>`_ at #airflow-dbt


Changelog
_________

We follow `Semantic Versioning <https://semver.org/>`_ for releases.
Check `CHANGELOG.rst <https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/blob/main/CHANGELOG.rst>`_
for the latest changes.


Contributing Guide
__________________

All contributions, bug reports, bug fixes, documentation improvements, enhancements are welcome.

A detailed overview an how to contribute can be found in the `Contributing Guide <https://astronomer.github.io/astronomer-cosmos/contributing>`_.

As contributors and maintainers to this project, you are expected to abide by the
`Contributor Code of Conduct <https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md>`_.


License
_______

`Apache License 2.0 <https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/blob/main/LICENSE>`_


Privacy Notice
______________

The application and this website collect telemetry to support the project's development. These can be disabled by the end-users.

Read the `Privacy Notice <https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/blob/main/PRIVACY_NOTICE.rst>`_ to learn more about it.

.. Tracking pixel for Scarf

.. image:: https://static.scarf.sh/a.png?x-pxid=ae43a92a-5a21-4c77-af8b-99c2242adf93
   :target: https://static.scarf.sh/a.png?x-pxid=ae43a92a-5a21-4c77-af8b-99c2242adf93


Security Policy
---------------

Check the project's `Security Policy <https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/blob/main/SECURITY.rst>`_ to learn
how to report security vulnerabilities in Astronomer Cosmos and how security issues reported to the Astronomer Cosmos
security team are handled.

Commit message:

Make the Cosmos repository compliant with OSPS-QA-04.01 (#2338)
According to
https://insights.linuxfoundation.org/project/astronomer-astronomer-cosmos/security,
Cosmos currently does not meet the following requirement:

> Requirement ID: OSPS-QA-04.01?
> While active, the project documentation MUST contain a list of any
codebases that are considered subprojects or additional repositories.

More details on this requirement are available in
https://baseline.openssf.org/versions/2025-02-25.html.

This PR introduces a section that highlights the related projects.

This is one of the two criteria that we're failing at the moment:
<img width="1155" height="293" alt="Screenshot 2026-02-06 at 14 12 54"
src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6c5224b1-fdfb-4d60-991d-eb4bc1e77c38"
/>

The other is being addressed in the PR
https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/pull/2337

README.rst, after:

.. License badge
.. |license| image:: https://img.shields.io/:license-Apache%202-blue.svg
    :target: https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.txt
    :alt: License

.. PyPI badges
.. |fury| image:: https://badge.fury.io/py/astronomer-cosmos.svg
    :target: https://badge.fury.io/py/astronomer-cosmos
    :alt: PyPI version

.. |python| image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/astronomer-cosmos.svg
    :target: https://pypi.org/project/astronomer-cosmos/
    :alt: Python versions

.. |downloads| image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/dm/astronomer-cosmos
    :target: https://pypi.org/project/astronomer-cosmos/
    :alt: PyPI downloads

.. Community badges
.. |contributors| image:: https://img.shields.io/github/contributors/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos
    :target: https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/graphs/contributors
    :alt: Contributors

.. |commits| image:: https://img.shields.io/github/commit-activity/m/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos
    :target: https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/commits/main
    :alt: Commit activity

.. |slack| image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/slack-%23airflow--dbt-white.svg?logo=slack&style=social
    :target: https://join.slack.com/t/apache-airflow/shared_invite/zt-1zy8e8h85-es~fn19iMzUmkhPwnyRT6Q
    :alt: Slack #airflow-dbt

.. |health| image:: https://insights.linuxfoundation.org/api/badge/health-score?project=astronomer-astronomer-cosmos
    :target: https://insights.linuxfoundation.org/project/astronomer-astronomer-cosmos
    :alt: LFX Health Score

.. Dev tools badges
.. |pre-commit| image:: https://results.pre-commit.ci/badge/github/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/main.svg
    :target: https://results.pre-commit.ci/latest/github/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/main
    :alt: pre-commit.ci status

.. Build status badges
.. |build-main| image:: https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/actions
    :alt: Build main

.. image:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/main/docs/_static/cosmos-logo.svg


===========================================================

|license| |fury| |python| |downloads|

|contributors| |commits| |slack| |health|

|pre-commit| |build-main|

Run your dbt Core projects as `Apache Airflow® <https://airflow.apache.org/>`_ DAGs and Task Groups with a few lines of code. Benefits include:

- Run dbt projects against Airflow connections instead of dbt profiles
- Native support for installing and running dbt in a virtual environment to avoid dependency conflicts with Airflow
- Run tests immediately after a model is done to catch issues early
- Utilize Airflow's data-aware scheduling to run models immediately after upstream ingestion
- Turn each dbt model into a task/task group complete with retries, alerting, etc.

Quickstart
__________

Check out the Getting Started guide on our `docs <https://astronomer.github.io/astronomer-cosmos/getting_started/index.html>`_. See more examples at `/dev/dags <https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/tree/main/dev/dags>`_ and at the `cosmos-demo repo <https://github.com/astronomer/cosmos-demo>`_.


Example Usage
___________________

You can render a Cosmos Airflow DAG using the ``DbtDag`` class. Here's an example with the `jaffle_shop project <https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle_shop>`_:

..
   This renders on Github but not Sphinx:

https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/blob/24aa38e528e299ef51ca6baf32f5a6185887d432/dev/dags/basic_cosmos_dag.py#L1-L42

This will generate an Airflow DAG that looks like this:

.. figure:: https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/blob/main/docs/_static/jaffle_shop_dag.png


Community
_________
- Join us on the Airflow `Slack <https://join.slack.com/t/apache-airflow/shared_invite/zt-1zy8e8h85-es~fn19iMzUmkhPwnyRT6Q>`_ at #airflow-dbt


Changelog
_________

We follow `Semantic Versioning <https://semver.org/>`_ for releases.
Check `CHANGELOG.rst <https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/blob/main/CHANGELOG.rst>`_
for the latest changes.


Contributing Guide
__________________

All contributions, bug reports, bug fixes, documentation improvements, enhancements are welcome.

A detailed overview an how to contribute can be found in the `Contributing Guide <https://astronomer.github.io/astronomer-cosmos/contributing>`_.

As contributors and maintainers to this project, you are expected to abide by the
`Contributor Code of Conduct <https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md>`_.


License
_______

`Apache License 2.0 <https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/blob/main/LICENSE>`_


Privacy Notice
______________

The application and this website collect telemetry to support the project's development. These can be disabled by the end-users.

Read the `Privacy Notice <https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/blob/main/PRIVACY_NOTICE.rst>`_ to learn more about it.

.. Tracking pixel for Scarf

.. image:: https://static.scarf.sh/a.png?x-pxid=ae43a92a-5a21-4c77-af8b-99c2242adf93
   :target: https://static.scarf.sh/a.png?x-pxid=ae43a92a-5a21-4c77-af8b-99c2242adf93


Related Repositories
____________________

The core Astronomer Cosmos library is developed in this repository (`astronomer-cosmos <https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos>`_). The following additional repositories are maintained as part of the Astronomer Cosmos project:

- `cosmos-demo <https://github.com/astronomer/cosmos-demo>`_ - Example DAGs and demo project for Cosmos

At this time, Cosmos has no other subprojects or additional repositories beyond the one listed above.


Security Policy
---------------

Check the project's `Security Policy <https://github.com/astronomer/astronomer-cosmos/blob/main/SECURITY.rst>`_ to learn
how to report security vulnerabilities in Astronomer Cosmos and how security issues reported to the Astronomer Cosmos
security team are handled.
